# 05/15/2026  
Today I built my ISA Design Document, and drew out the RTL datapath for the ANKM-E processor. I built the ISA Design document as reference documentation specifying which instructions I am implementing, as well as their encodings, and the overall structure of the registers, and how they should be used. I also grouped instructions by the 6 RISC-V Instruction Categories. R-type instructions are register to register instructions, which are almost exclusively used for logical and arithmetic operations between registers. I-type instructions are register to immediate instructions, which have one base register along with an offset, storing the result in another register. These instructions can be used for arithmetic and logical operations with a hardcoded input, as well as for reading from memory, and the special case of JALR, which returns from a function. S-Type instructions are store instructions, comprising of 2 source registers, and an immediate value. They are typically used to store the value in a register to a data memory address calculated by adding the offset to the other source register. B-type instructions, or branch instructions, are almost exactly structurally similar to S-type instructions, but the immediate is implicitly left shifted by 1, since instructions are aligned by 2-bytes in RISC-V compression, although in practice, instructions will be 4-byte aligned based on the ISA Design document. These instructions compare two registers, and if the condition is met, sets the program counter to PC plus specified immediate value. U-type instructions are upper immediate instruction, and comprise of one destination register, and a 20 bit immediate value. These instructions are typically used to load the upper 20 bits of the destination register with the specified immediate value. Finally, J-type instructions, or unconditional jumps, are the exact same structurally to U-type, but the immediate value is once again implicitly left shifted by one to match the RISC-V instruction byte alignment. These typically store PC + 4 to the destination register, and sets the PC to PC plus the specified immediate value.

Some decisions I made were stubbing fence, ebreak/ecall, and CSR instructions, as my processor is single cycle, meaning, in theory, instruction executions take only one cycle. Also the processor is bare metal and has no calls to external operating systems, so there is no need for any of these instructions to be called in practice.

The RTL datapath specified the flow of data from the program counter to the destination result, and all components in between. Some design choices I made here included implementing a harvard-style architecture on the processor (although in actuality the processor is a Von Neumann processor with the shared memory split into instruction and data memory through implementation). 

I was initially confused by the instruction decoder as I genuinely thought it was implemented as a decoder, when in reality it was a PLA which output the control signals used by other components in the data path later in the instruction cycle. Another source of confusion was the IMEM bus being split into different bits, especially the fact that different instruction types would have the same bits signal different things. I then realized that by feeding in the opcode and function bits into the instruction decoders, the rest of the datapath components would figure out what the orientation of immediate, and register bits would be. Finally for the immediate generator, I initially was confused by how one control signal could be used to generate the immediate when there were 5 different immediate instruction types, but then realized that the controller could output a 3-bit control signal to the generator.



